Research and Scientific Method-
For a clear perception of the term research, one should know the meaning of scientific method. The
two terms, research and scientific method, are closely related. Research, as we have already stated,
can be termed as “an inquiry into the nature of, the reasons for, and the consequences of any
particular set of circumstances, whether these circumstances are experimentally controlled or recorded
just as they occur. Further, research implies the researcher is interested in more than particular
results; he is interested in the repeatability of the results and in their extension to more complicated
and general situations.”
 On the other hand, the philosophy common to all research methods and
techniques, although they may vary considerably from one science to another, is usually given the
name of scientific method. In this context, Karl Pearson writes, “The scientific method is one and
same in the branches (of science) and that method is the method of all logically trained minds … the
unity of all sciences consists alone in its methods, not its material; the man who classifies facts of any
kind whatever, who sees their mutual relation and describes their sequences, is applying the Scientific
Method and is a man of science.”
 Scientific method is the pursuit of truth as determined by logical
considerations. The ideal of science is to achieve a systematic interrelation of facts. Scientific method
attempts to achieve “this ideal by experimentation, observation, logical arguments from accepted
postulates and a combination of these three in varying proportions.”9
 In scientific method, logic aids
in formulating propositions explicitly and accurately so that their possible alternatives become clear.
Further, logic develops the consequences of such alternatives, and when these are compared with
observable phenomena, it becomes possible for the researcher or the scientist to state which alternative
is most in harmony with the observed facts. All this is done through experimentation and survey
investigations which constitute the integral parts of scientific method.
Experimentation is done to test hypotheses and to discover new relationships. If any, among
variables. But the conclusions drawn on the basis of experimental data are generally criticized for
either faulty assumptions, poorly designed experiments, badly executed experiments or faulty
interpretations. As such the researcher must pay all possible attention while developing the experimental
design and must state only probable inferences. The purpose of survey investigations may also be to
provide scientifically gathered information to work as a basis for the researchers for their conclusions.
The scientific method is, thus, based on certain basic postulates which can be stated as under:

1. It relies on empirical evidence;
2. It utilizes relevant concepts;
3. It is committed to only objective considerations;
4. It presupposes ethical neutrality, i.e., it aims at nothing but making only adequate and correct
statements about population objects;
5. It results into probabilistic predictions;
6. Its methodology is made known to all concerned for critical scrutiny are for use in testing
the conclusions through replication;
7. It aims at formulating most general axioms or what can be termed as scientific theories.
Thus, “the scientific method encourages a rigorous, impersonal mode of procedure dictated by
the demands of logic and objective procedure.”10 Accordingly, scientific method implies an objective,
logical and systematic method, i.e., a method free from personal bias or prejudice, a method to
ascertain demonstrable qualities of a phenomenon capable of being verified, a method wherein the
researcher is guided by the rules of logical reasoning, a method wherein the investigation proceeds in
an orderly manner and a method that implies internal consistency.

Importance of Knowing How Research is Done
The study of research methodology gives the student the necessary training in gathering material and
arranging or card-indexing them, participation in the field work when required, and also training in
techniques for the collection of data appropriate to particular problems, in the use of statistics,
questionnaires and controlled experimentation and in recording evidence, sorting it out and interpreting
it. In fact, importance of knowing the methodology of research or how research is done stems from
the following considerations:
(i) For one who is preparing himself for a career of carrying out research, the importance of
knowing research methodology and research techniques is obvious since the same constitute
the tools of his trade. The knowledge of methodology provides good training specially to the
new research worker and enables him to do better research. It helps him to develop disciplined
thinking or a ‘bent of mind’ to observe the field objectively. Hence, those aspiring for
careerism in research must develop the skill of using research techniques and must thoroughly
understand the logic behind them.
(ii) Knowledge of how to do research will inculcate the ability to evaluate and use research
results with reasonable confidence. In other words, we can state that the knowledge of
research methodology is helpful in various fields such as government or business
administration, community development and social work where persons are increasingly
called upon to evaluate and use research results for action.
(iii) When one knows how research is done, then one may have the satisfaction of acquiring a
new intellectual tool which can become a way of looking at the world and of judging every
day experience. Accordingly, it enables use to make intelligent decisions concerning problems
facing us in practical life at different points of time. Thus, the knowledge of research
methodology provides tools to took at things in life objectively.
(iv) In this scientific age, all of us are in many ways consumers of research results and we can
use them intelligently provided we are able to judge the adequacy of the methods by which
they have been obtained. The knowledge of methodology helps the consumer of research
results to evaluate them and enables him to take rational decisions.
Research Process
Before embarking on the details of research methodology and techniques, it seems appropriate to
present a brief overview of the research process. Research process consists of series of actions or
steps necessary to effectively carry out research and the desired sequencing of these steps. The
chart shown in Figure 1.1 well illustrates a research process

The chart indicates that the research process consists of a number of closely related activities,
as shown through I to VII. But such activities overlap continuously rather than following a strictly
prescribed sequence. At times, the first step determines the nature of the last step to be undertaken.
If subsequent procedures have not been taken into account in the early stages, serious difficulties
may arise which may even prevent the completion of the study. One should remember that the
various steps involved in a research process are not mutually exclusive; nor they are separate and
distinct. They do not necessarily follow each other in any specific order and the researcher has to be
constantly anticipating at each step in the research process the requirements of the subsequent
steps. However, the following order concerning various steps provides a useful procedural guideline
regarding the research process: (1) formulating the research problem; (2) extensive literature survey;
(3) developing the hypothesis; (4) preparing the research design; (5) determining sample design;
(6) collecting the data; (7) execution of the project; (8) analysis of data; (9) hypothesis testing;
(10) generalisations and interpretation, and (11) preparation of the report or presentation of the results,
i.e., formal write-up of conclusions reached.
A brief description of the above stated steps will be helpful.

1. Formulating the research problem: There are two types of research problems, viz., those
which relate to states of nature and those which relate to relationships between variables. At the
very outset the researcher must single out the problem he wants to study, i.e., he must decide the
general area of interest or aspect of a subject-matter that he would like to inquire into. Initially the
problem may be stated in a broad general way and then the ambiguities, if any, relating to the problem
be resolved. Then, the feasibility of a particular solution has to be considered before a working
formulation of the problem can be set up. The formulation of a general topic into a specific research
problem, thus, constitutes the first step in a scientific enquiry. Essentially two steps are involved in
formulating the research problem, viz., understanding the problem thoroughly, and rephrasing the
same into meaningful terms from an analytical point of view.
The best way of understanding the problem is to discuss it with one’s own colleagues or with
those having some expertise in the matter. In an academic institution the researcher can seek the
help from a guide who is usually an experienced man and has several research problems in mind.
Often, the guide puts forth the problem in general terms and it is up to the researcher to narrow it
down and phrase the problem in operational terms. In private business units or in governmental
organisations, the problem is usually earmarked by the administrative agencies with whom the
researcher can discuss as to how the problem originally came about and what considerations are
involved in its possible solutions.
The researcher must at the same time examine all available literature to get himself acquainted
with the selected problem. He may review two types of literature—the conceptual literature concerning
the concepts and theories, and the empirical literature consisting of studies made earlier which are
similar to the one proposed. The basic outcome of this review will be the knowledge as to what data
and other materials are available for operational purposes which will enable the researcher to specify
his own research problem in a meaningful context. After this the researcher rephrases the problem
into analytical or operational terms i.e., to put the problem in as specific terms as possible. This task
of formulating, or defining, a research problem is a step of greatest importance in the entire research
process. The problem to be investigated must be defined unambiguously for that will help discriminating
relevant data from irrelevant ones. Care must, however, be taken to verify the objectivity and validity
of the background facts concerning the problem. Professor W.A. Neiswanger correctly states that
the statement of the objective is of basic importance because it determines the data which are to be
collected, the characteristics of the data which are relevant, relations which are to be explored, the
choice of techniques to be used in these explorations and the form of the final report. If there are
certain pertinent terms, the same should be clearly defined along with the task of formulating the
problem. In fact, formulation of the problem often follows a sequential pattern where a number of
formulations are set up, each formulation more specific than the preceeding one, each one phrased in
more analytical terms, and each more realistic in terms of the available data and resources.
2. Extensive literature survey: Once the problem is formulated, a brief summary of it should be
written down. It is compulsory for a research worker writing a thesis for a Ph.D. degree to write a
synopsis of the topic and submit it to the necessary Committee or the Research Board for approval.
At this juncture the researcher should undertake extensive literature survey connected with the
problem. For this purpose, the abstracting and indexing journals and published or unpublished
bibliographies are the first place to go to. Academic journals, conference proceedings, government
reports, books etc., must be tapped depending on the nature of the problem. In this process, it should
be remembered that one source will lead to another. The earlier studies, if any, which are similar to
the study in hand should be carefully studied. A good library will be a great help to the researcher at
this stage.
3. Development of working hypotheses: After extensive literature survey, researcher should
state in clear terms the working hypothesis or hypotheses. Working hypothesis is tentative assumption
made in order to draw out and test its logical or empirical consequences. As such the manner in
which research hypotheses are developed is particularly important since they provide the focal point
for research. They also affect the manner in which tests must be conducted in the analysis of data
and indirectly the quality of data which is required for the analysis. In most types of research, the
development of working hypothesis plays an important role. Hypothesis should be very specific and
limited to the piece of research in hand because it has to be tested. The role of the hypothesis is to
guide the researcher by delimiting the area of research and to keep him on the right track. It sharpens
his thinking and focuses attention on the more important facets of the problem. It also indicates the
type of data required and the type of methods of data analysis to be used.
How does one go about developing working hypotheses? The answer is by using the following
approach:
(a) Discussions with colleagues and experts about the problem, its origin and the objectives in
seeking a solution;
(b) Examination of data and records, if available, concerning the problem for possible trends,
peculiarities and other clues;
(c) Review of similar studies in the area or of the studies on similar problems; and
(d) Exploratory personal investigation which involves original field interviews on a limited scale
with interested parties and individuals with a view to secure greater insight into the practical
aspects of the problem.
Thus, working hypotheses arise as a result of a-priori thinking about the subject, examination of the
available data and material including related studies and the counsel of experts and interested parties.
Working hypotheses are more useful when stated in precise and clearly defined terms. It may as well
be remembered that occasionally we may encounter a problem where we do not need working
hypotheses, specially in the case of exploratory or formulative researches which do not aim at testing
the hypothesis. But as a general rule, specification of working hypotheses in another basic step of the
research process in most research problems.
