Research Approaches:-
types of research brings to light the fact that there are two basic
approaches to research, viz., quantitative approach and the qualitative approach. The former
involves the generation of data in quantitative form which can be subjected to rigorous quantitative
analysis in a formal and rigid fashion. This approach can be further sub-classified into inferential,
experimental and simulation approaches to research. The purpose of inferential approach to
research is to form a data base from which to infer characteristics or relationships of population. This
usually means survey research where a sample of population is studied (questioned or observed) to
determine its characteristics, and it is then inferred that the population has the same characteristics.
Experimental approach is characterised by much greater control over the research environment
and in this case some variables are manipulated to observe their effect on other variables. Simulation
approach involves the construction of an artificial environment within which relevant information
and data can be generated. This permits an observation of the dynamic behaviour of a system (or its
sub-system) under controlled conditions. The term ‘simulation’ in the context of business and social
sciences applications refers to “the operation of a numerical model that represents the structure of a
dynamic process. Given the values of initial conditions, parameters and exogenous variables, a
simulation is run to represent the behaviour of the process over time.”5
 Simulation approach can also
be useful in building models for understanding future conditions.
Qualitative approach to research is concerned with subjective assessment of attitudes, opinions
and behaviour. Research in such a situation is a function of researcher’s insights and impressions.
Such an approach to research generates results either in non-quantitative form or in the form which
are not subjected to rigorous quantitative analysis. Generally, the techniques of focus group interviews,
projective techniques and depth interviews are used. 

Significance of Research
“All progress is born of inquiry. Doubt is often better than overconfidence, for it leads to inquiry, and
inquiry leads to invention” is a famous Hudson Maxim in context of which the significance of research
can well be understood. Increased amounts of research make progress possible. Research inculcates
scientific and inductive thinking and it promotes the development of logical habits of thinking
and organisation.
The role of research in several fields of applied economics, whether related to business or
to the economy as a whole, has greatly increased in modern times. The increasingly complex
nature of business and government has focused attention on the use of research in solving operational
problems. Research, as an aid to economic policy, has gained added importance, both for government
and business.
Research provides the basis for nearly all government policies in our economic system.
For instance, government’s budgets rest in part on an analysis of the needs and desires of the people
and on the availability of revenues to meet these needs. The cost of needs has to be equated to
probable revenues and this is a field where research is most needed. Through research we can
devise alternative policies and can as well examine the consequences of each of these alternatives.
Decision-making may not be a part of research, but research certainly facilitates the decisions of the
policy maker. Government has also to chalk out programmes for dealing with all facets of the country’s
existence and most of these will be related directly or indirectly to economic conditions. The plight of
cultivators, the problems of big and small business and industry, working conditions, trade union
activities, the problems of distribution, even the size and nature of defence services are matters
requiring research. Thus, research is considered necessary with regard to the allocation of nation’s
resources. Another area in government, where research is necessary, is collecting information on the
economic and social structure of the nation. Such information indicates what is happening in the
economy and what changes are taking place. Collecting such statistical information is by no means a
routine task, but it involves a variety of research problems. These day nearly all governments maintain
large staff of research technicians or experts to carry on this work. Thus, in the context of government,
research as a tool to economic policy has three distinct phases of operation, viz., (i) investigation of
economic structure through continual compilation of facts; (ii) diagnosis of events that are taking
place and the analysis of the forces underlying them; and (iii) the prognosis, i.e., the prediction of
future developments.
Research has its special significance in solving various operational and planning problems
of business and industry. Operations research and market research, along with motivational research,
are considered crucial and their results assist, in more than one way, in taking business decisions.
Market research is the investigation of the structure and development of a market for the purpose of
formulating efficient policies for purchasing, production and sales. Operations research refers to the
application of mathematical, logical and analytical techniques to the solution of business problems of
cost minimisation or of profit maximisation or what can be termed as optimisation problems. Motivational
research of determining why people behave as they do is mainly concerned with market characteristics.
In other words, it is concerned with the determination of motivations underlying the consumer (market)
behaviour. All these are of great help to people in business and industry who are responsible for
taking business decisions. Research with regard to demand and market factors has great utility in
business. Given knowledge of future demand, it is generally not difficult for a firm, or for an industry
to adjust its supply schedule within the limits of its projected capacity. Market analysis has become
an integral tool of business policy these days. Business budgeting, which ultimately results in a
projected profit and loss account, is based mainly on sales estimates which in turn depends on
business research. Once sales forecasting is done, efficient production and investment programmes
can be set up around which are grouped the purchasing and financing plans. Research, thus, replaces
intuitive business decisions by more logical and scientific decisions.
Research is equally important for social scientists in studying social relationships and in
seeking answers to various social problems. It provides the intellectual satisfaction of knowing a
few things just for the sake of knowledge and also has practical utility for the social scientist to know
for the sake of being able to do something better or in a more efficient manner. Research in social
sciences is concerned both with knowledge for its own sake and with knowledge for what it can
contribute to practical concerns. “This double emphasis is perhaps especially appropriate in the case
of social science. On the one hand, its responsibility as a science is to develop a body of principles
that make possible the understanding and prediction of the whole range of human interactions. On
the other hand, because of its social orientation, it is increasingly being looked to for practical guidance
in solving immediate problems of human relations.

In addition to what has been stated above, the significance of research can also be understood
keeping in view the following points:
(a) To those students who are to write a master’s or Ph.D. thesis, research may mean a
careerism or a way to attain a high position in the social structure;
(b) To professionals in research methodology, research may mean a source of livelihood;
(c) To philosophers and thinkers, research may mean the outlet for new ideas and insights;
(d) To literary men and women, research may mean the development of new styles and creative
work;
(e) To analysts and intellectuals, research may mean the generalisations of new theories.
Thus, research is the fountain of knowledge for the sake of knowledge and an important source
of providing guidelines for solving different business, governmental and social problems. It is a sort of
formal training which enables one to understand the new developments in one’s field in a better way

Research Methods versus Methodology
It seems appropriate at this juncture to explain the difference between research methods and research
methodology. Research methods may be understood as all those methods/techniques that are used
for conduction of research. Research methods or techniques*, thus, refer to the methods the researchers

Type Methods Techniques
1. Library (i) Analysis of historical Recording of notes, Content analysis, Tape and Film listening and
 Research records analysis.
(ii) Analysis of documents Statistical compilations and manipulations, reference and abstract
guides, contents analysis.
2. Field (i) Non-participant direct Observational behavioural scales, use of score cards, etc.
 Research observation
(ii) Participant observation Interactional recording, possible use of tape recorders, photo graphic
techniques.
(iii) Mass observation Recording mass behaviour, interview using independent observers in
public places.
(iv) Mail questionnaire Identification of social and economic background of respondents.
(v) Opinionnaire Use of attitude scales, projective techniques, use of sociometric scales.
(vi) Personal interview Interviewer uses a detailed schedule with open and closed questions.
(vii) Focused interview Interviewer focuses attention upon a given experience and its effects.
(viii) Group interview Small groups of respondents are interviewed simultaneously.
(ix) Telephone survey Used as a survey technique for information and for discerning
opinion; may also be used as a follow up of questionnaire.
(x) Case study and life history Cross sectional collection of data for intensive analysis, longitudinal
collection of data of intensive character.
3. Laboratory Small group study of random Use of audio-visual recording devices, use of observers, etc.
 Research behaviour, play and role analysis

use in performing research operations. In other words, all those methods which are used by the
researcher during the course of studying his research problem are termed as research methods.
Since the object of research, particularly the applied research, it to arrive at a solution for a given
problem, the available data and the unknown aspects of the problem have to be related to each other
to make a solution possible. Keeping this in view, research methods can be put into the following
three groups:
1. In the first group we include those methods which are concerned with the collection of
data. These methods will be used where the data already available are not sufficient to
arrive at the required solution;
2. The second group consists of those statistical techniques which are used for establishing
relationships between the data and the unknowns;
3. The third group consists of those methods which are used to evaluate the accuracy of the
results obtained.
Research methods falling in the above stated last two groups are generally taken as the analytical
tools of research.
Research methodology is a way to systematically solve the research problem. It may be
understood as a science of studying how research is done scientifically. In it we study the various
steps that are generally adopted by a researcher in studying his research problem along with the logic
behind them. It is necessary for the researcher to know not only the research methods/techniques
but also the methodology. Researchers not only need to know how to develop certain indices or tests,
how to calculate the mean, the mode, the median or the standard deviation or chi-square, how to
apply particular research techniques, but they also need to know which of these methods or techniques,
are relevant and which are not, and what would they mean and indicate and why. Researchers also
need to understand the assumptions underlying various techniques and they need to know the criteria
by which they can decide that certain techniques and procedures will be applicable to certain problems
and others will not. All this means that it is necessary for the researcher to design his methodology
for his problem as the same may differ from problem to problem. For example, an architect, who
designs a building, has to consciously evaluate the basis of his decisions, i.e., he has to evaluate why
and on what basis he selects particular size, number and location of doors, windows and ventilators,
uses particular materials and not others and the like. Similarly, in research the scientist has to expose
the research decisions to evaluation before they are implemented. He has to specify very clearly and
precisely what decisions he selects and why he selects them so that they can be evaluated by others also.
From what has been stated above, we can say that research methodology has many dimensions
and research methods do constitute a part of the research methodology. The scope of research
methodology is wider than that of research methods. Thus, when we talk of research methodology
we not only talk of the research methods but also consider the logic behind the methods we use
in the context of our research study and explain why we are using a particular method or
technique and why we are not using others so that research results are capable of being
evaluated either by the researcher himself or by others. Why a research study has been undertaken,
how the research problem has been defined, in what way and why the hypothesis has been formulated,
what data have been collected and what particular method has been adopted, why particular technique
of analysing data has been used and a host of similar other questions are usually answered when we
talk of research methodology concerning a research problem or study
